**Polling Errors in the 2020 U.S. Presidential Election**

**Introduction:**

The 2020 U.S. presidential election was one of the most contentious and scrutinized political events in modern history. Despite high stakes and extensive coverage, dramatic polling errors in several states called into question the accuracy and reliability of current polling methodologies. In particular, incorrect predictions in swing states failed to predict changes in voting behavior among certain demographics, causing experts to question whether pollsters were creating truly representative samples in these states (Keeter, Scott, et al.).
	This paper seeks to investigate whether polling in the 2020 U.S. presidential election considered demographically representative samples of the population of each state, how reasonable the polling averages are given the true predictor from the general election, and whether polling error differs between swing and non-swing states. To answer these questions, we applied a variety of statistical simulation and analysis methods to polling data from FiveThirtyEight, county-level election returns from the MIT Election Data and Science Lab, and state-level demographic data from the  U.S. Census Bureau.  We used two-sample permutation tests with the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test statistic to assess the distribution of vote shares between swing and non-swing states for each major candidate. We used Generalized Linear Models to establish the general relationship between poll and election results, as well as to assess the relationship between the population proportion of different demographics in a state and how inaccurate the polls were to investigate whether certain groups were in fact undersampled or generally misrepresented in polling data. Finally, we used bootstrapping techniques to find a confidence interval for the difference in polling errors between swing and non-swing states. Additionally, we examined the bootstrapped distributions of polling errors for both groups and conducted state-level bootstrapping for each battleground state to assess variability in polling error across the country. 

**Data:**

	The primary polling data used for this research comes from FiveThirtyEight, an ABC News affiliate. One prominent feature of the FiveThirtyEight website is their polling averages. In this case the 2020 presidential general election averages for each state were used. According to FiveThirtyEight, this data is “an updating average of 2020 presidential general election polls, accounting for each poll’s quality, sample size and recency” (538). Meaning that these numbers are generated by taking many different polls from different sources into account and evaluating them all based on these criteria — the reliability of the poller, the sample size, and when the poll was performed — to create an estimation for the true percentage of American voters that  support each candidate. This data was put into a csv file along with the true results from Politico.

Plots: Graph of the polling and final vote percentages for Joe Biden and Donald Trump as found in voting2020.csv and the differences between those numbers (poll error) by state.


	This voting2020.csv dataset, which contains polling data from the 2020 U.S. presidential election, was also used in our analysis. The dataset includes state, vote share for both major candidates  (Joseph R. Biden Jr and Donald J. Trump), election outcome, and polling data. We added columns computing polling error for both candidates and a categorical variable indicating whether a state is considered swing or non-swing. Additionally, we ensured that any missing data points were addressed by filtering to remove incomplete rows.  After preparing the dataset we resampled in multiple iterations to construct bootstrapped distributions of polling errors, calculate a confidence interval for the difference in mean polling errors between swing and non-swing states, and perform state-level bootstrapping to assess the variability in polling errors across battleground states. 
	For the generalized linear models, we merged voting2020.csv with demographic data from the U.S. Census Bureau as of 2019. This data included racial demographics state-by-state as a percentage of that state’s population. Columns were also added for the differences between the candidates polling numbers, actual result numbers, and the difference between those two data points. In those columns, negative numbers indicate that the associated candidate underperformed the polls and positive numbers indicate  that they overperformed. These were the values that were used to run the regressions, comparing these values against the demographic data from the state_demographics.csv file which contains the census data. 
	To analyze county-level voting patterns, we utilized data from the MIT Election Data and Science Lab that included election results for each county (or county-equivalent) from the 2000 through 2020 presidential elections, although only the 2020 data was relevant for this analysis. Compared to state-level sources (which can obscure county-level variation), this dataset is larger and more granular, making it more suitable for statistical tests. Key variables in this dataset include “county_fips” to uniquely identify each location, “candidate” to separate results for each location, and the “candidate_votes” variable. To clean this data, we removed all rows from elections other than 2020, removed the “year” and “office” columns (as they were constant for all remaining rows), removed rows for candidates other than Trump or Biden, aggregated results by candidate for all counties whose reported tallies were split by voting method, added a “voteshare” column calculated from “candidatevotes”,, and added an  “is_swing” column, which denotes whether that county is in a swing state, based on the criteria described in the following section.
After cleaning, we plotted the distributions of county-level vote share for each major-party 2020 presidential candidate for both “swing” states, and non-”swing” states, displayed below:
	
 We observe a noticeable visual difference in the distributions for each candidate: Biden tended to receive a greater vote share in swing state counties, compared to non-swing state counties . The non-swing state distribution for Trump is greatly left-skewed, with a greater share of counties tilting heavily toward Trump (75%) in non-swing states compared to swing states. These plots show that non-swing state county voting patterns may not necessarily be representative of swing state counties, which motivates further verification and investigation.

**Methods:**

	Analyzing polling data requires multiple steps and approaches in order to glean the most information possible. The benefit of analyzing polls of past elections is we also have the results which serve as observational data or our true predictor. The first step is simply verifying that the polls hold some degree of accuracy. A great way of doing this is a generalized linear model. While not sufficient on its own for deeper analysis, it can show whether the polling methods employed at least are in the ballpark of uncovering the true support for a candidate. 
	Next, to study the difference in polling errors between swing and non-swing states it is necessary to define what a swing state is. For this purpose, a swing state is a state that had less than a five-point difference between the two major candidates in voting results. This list for the 2020 presidential election comprises Arizona, Florida, Georgia, Michigan, Nevada, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin.
	Although we don’t have access to county-level polling data, we can test whether there was a difference in voting patterns in the 2020 presidential election between swing states and non-swing states using the county-level result data from MIT Election and Data Science Lab. We can run a permutation test with 1000 iterations,, at the 95% confidence level,  utilizing the Kolomogorov-Smirnov test statistic to compare the distributions of county-level vote share between swing states (Fs) and non-swing states (Fn)  for both Biden and Trump, without knowing their underlying parameters. If we reject the null hypothesis Ho: Fs = Fn, we can investigate demographic differences between these two disjoint subsets of states. Any differences would be correlated with the discrepancy in vote share distributions, and those associated demographics would be crucial for determining the overall election result. As we would not be able to extrapolate a relationship between polling data and election results for non-swing states to swing states, polling in battleground states for these demographics is crucial to get right when predicting the election outcome, so they are what we would focus on when examining the accuracy of polling data.
Apart from establishing whether there is in fact a relationship between polling data and election results, generalized linear models can also be used to closer evaluate how accurately polled different racial demographics are. One salient issue in 2020 polling was the underrepresentation of certain minority demographic groups. In particular, Florida supposedly saw an underrepresentation of the Latino population, who voted for Donald Trump in larger numbers in key swing states Florida and Georgia compared to 2016 (Sonneland). By applying generalized linear models to demographic data checking for a relationship between the demographic percentages in a state to the difference in value for each candidate in the polls and the actual election in that state, it can be evaluated if certain demographics such as Latinos were underrepresented in polling samples across the board, only in swing states, or not at all. Additionally by filtering out swing states and evaluating them separately, it can be examined if swing states were polled differently than non-swing states. However, in using generalized linear models it is necessary to operate under certain assumptions. In this case it is assumed that polling error follows a gaussian distribution and bigger or smaller errors are simply due to whether or not the poll in question included a properly representative sample of the population. 
In addition to the generalized linear models, bootstrapping is a useful tool to further understand the variability in polling errors across battleground and non-battleground states. By repeatedly drawing samples with replacement from the observed polling errors, we can generate a distribution of estimates without relying on strong parametric assumptions or a knowledge of the true underlying distribution of errors. In particular, we can construct confidence intervals for the difference in polling errors between battleground and non-battleground states. By simulating potential outcomes, bootstrapping provides insight into the variability of polling errors and allows us to assess the reliability of conclusions drawn from the data. Further, we are also able to evaluate polling accuracy across individual states to discern state-specific distributions that may not be apparent in the aggregated analysis. By utilizing bootstrapping to quantify uncertainty in polling error estimates we are able to identify polling discrepancies between battleground states and non-battleground states. 
Simulations:

Permutation test results:

:

Bootstrapped distributions for polling errors: 






Generalized Linear Models:



By racial demographics:

National:
Difference between election result and poll value for Biden vs demographic data:


Difference between election result and poll value for Trump vs demographic data:


Swing States:
Difference between election result and poll value for Biden vs demographic data:

Difference between election result and poll value for Trump vs demographic data:


Non-Swing States:
Difference between election result and poll value for Biden vs demographic data:

Difference between election result and poll value for Trump vs demographic data:


**Analysis:**

	For both permutation tests, we reject Ho: Fn = Fs at the 95% confidence level based on the calculated K-S test statistics and corresponding p-values. By concluding that Fn ≠ Fs, we then seek to investigate state-level demographic variables that may correlate with this observed difference in county-level voting share distributions on a state-wide level. Using the demographic data from the Census Bureau, we include the plots for relevant variables below, with each bar colored by their swing state status:



The generalized linear models do show a strong linear relationship between the poll numbers and final results in a state for each candidate at an α significance level of 0.05. While this was expected, it at least gives a firm mathematical legitimacy to the idea that the polls are predicting the election results in each state. However, like any other sample, no poll can be perfect. 
Next, to learn how to improve the sample taken in future polls, it is necessary to examine the polling error that does exist. This was done by running generalized linear models comparing the polling error to demographic data. Given the general accusations of polling misrepresenting the opinions of certain demographic groups, it is somewhat surprising that these linear models do not show strong evidence of under sampling among most groups. The racial demographic data was run on the national level, as well as among the separated groups of swing and non-swing states. Nationally, there is convincing evidence that the black population was not correctly polled. With a p-value of 0.00164, the percentage of a state’s population composed by the black community was associated with Biden out performing the polls and with a p-value of 0.00172 was associated with Trump under performing polls. 

However, no other demographic had a convincing correlation. Additionally, in swing states the p-value associated with the black population rises above 0.05, at 0.118 and 0.0737 for Biden and Trump respectively. This indicates that swing states may have been polled more accurately than non-swing states. In fact, when comparing the mean differences between the candidates election performance and poll numbers, both had smaller differences in swing states. The mean difference for Biden was -1.409 in non-swing states and just -0.325 in swing states. As for Trump his non-swing state number of 4.437 drops to just 3.613 in swing states.
	However, while one might expect battleground states to have more accurate polling due to a higher level of political attention, using bootstrapping techniques we found that battleground states and non-battleground states are similar in central tendency. Specifically, the bootstrapped confidence interval for the difference in polling errors between the two groups ranges from -3.76 to 3.34, which includes 0, indicating that the mean difference in polling errors is not statistically significant. This suggests that there is no clear difference in the magnitude of polling errors between battleground states and non-battleground states. Further, we observed greater variability in polling errors for non-battleground states. The bootstrapped standard deviations of polling errors reveal that battleground states have lower variability in polling error, with more consistent outcomes across iterations. Conversely, non-battleground states have higher variability suggesting less consistent polling outcomes, potentially due to less frequent polling. 

**Discussion:**

	The generalized linear models used seem to demonstrate that in the 2020 presidential election the black demographic’s support for Joe Biden was underestimated in polls. Aside from that, there were no associations with conclusive levels of certainty. This suggests that the black community was undersampled in polls. In regards to relevance and advice to be given in future polling endeavors, it seems the best advice is for pollsters to put greater emphasis on including black communities in the polling process, or at least evaluating their process for sources of bias that may have led to that community being underestimated in their support for Biden, especially in battleground states. However, it seems likely that overall there is no large problem with undersampling the Latino community as theorized given there is no association between Latino population and polling error. Additionally, because the bootstrapping simulation demonstrates that there is not a significant difference in polling error between swing and non-swing states, it does not seem likely that the difference in significance in the linear models between swing and non-swing states is indicative of a difference in polling accuracy but simply a difference in sample size since there are only eight swing states.
	While there is no statistically significant difference in mean polling errors between battleground and non-battleground states, the greater variability in non-battleground states suggests that more consistent polling may be needed to improve accuracy. Additionally, the lack of statistically significant difference in polling error may suggest that polling quality and methodology across states face similar challenges to accuracy. Further research should focus on the variability of polling errors in battleground and non-battleground states to better understand how to improve accuracy in future elections. 

	

**Works Cited**

Keeter, Scott, et al. “What 2020’s Election Poll Errors Tell Us about the Accuracy of Issue 
Polling.” Pew Research Center, Pew Research Center, 2 Mar. 2021, 
www.pewresearch.org/methods/2021/03/02/what-2020s-election-poll-errors-tell-us-about-the-accuracy-of-issue-polling/. 
Shirani-Mehr, et al. “Disentangling Bias and Variance in Election Polls.” Journal of the 
American Statistical Association, Taylor & Francis Group, 25 Jul. 2018, https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/01621459.2018.1448823 
Sonneland, Holly K. “Chart: How U.S. Latinos Voted in the 2020 Presidential Election.” 
AS/COA, Americas Society/Council of the Americas, 5 Nov. 2020, www.as-coa.org/articles/chart-how-us-latinos-voted-2020-presidential-election.
List of Data Sources::
Ryan Whitcomb, CORGIS Dataset Project, U.S. Census Bureau,”State Demographics CSV File” 5 Nov. 2021, https://data.census.gov/
https://corgis-edu.github.io/corgis/csv/state_demographics/ https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/fact/table/US#, accessed 15 Dec. 2024
Key variables: Demographic Variables (Age, Gender, Race and Ethnicity, Education), Socioeconomic Variables (Income, Employment Status, Occupation), Geographic Variables (State, County (rural vs. urban)),  
Cleaning: (1) Imputing missing values: if any values are missing we will use imputed values based on related variables (i.e. if income is missing, estimate income based on an average of the county or state’s income) (or maybe we just drop data with lots of missing variables). (2) Standardizing naming conventions for categorical variables: we will categorize education levels as “no college”, “some college”, “college graduate”. Similarly, we will categorize Race and Ethnicity as “”, (3) Urban-rural classification: we will use the Census Bureau’s Urban-Rural classification to standardize this distinction. (4) Employment Status
 voting2020.csv 
Sources: 
Politico, “Presidential Election Results 2020”, Last updated 8 Nov. 2022
https://www.politico.com/2020-election/results/president/ accessed 15 Dec. 2024 FiveThirtyEight, “Presidential: election: 2020 Polls”, 3 Nov. 2020, https://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/polls/president-general/2020/ Accessed 15 Dec. 2024
 countypres_2000-2020.csv
	MIT Election Data and Science Lab. County Presidential Election Returns 
2000-2020. (V13). Cambridge, MA: Harvard Dataverse, 2018. Web. 18 Oct 2024. 
<https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/VOQCHQ>
FiveThirtyEight provides information from various polls taken throughout the election cycle and up to Election Day, on the national and state levels
Source: https://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/polls/president-general/2020/
